---
layout: post
title: "Silence is the Enemy"
date: 2014-10-07 13:22:19
tags: 
    - Makers Academy
    - Craftmanship
published: true
---

I've been thinking about this post for a few weeks, but [Benji
Lanyado](@benjilanyado) from [Picfair](https://www.picfair.com/) has just given
a great talk about starting his business. Great for a number of reasons (he's
a very charismatic speaker to begin with), but the key thing I'm taking home
with me is what he's just said about, well - talking.

> Talk to everyone. Get out of your flat.

It's easy to forget that in a few weeks I'm not going to be around here at
Makers. And that the best thing - the _best_ thing - about being here is talking
to people.

At every stage of coding - whether in solving a problem, learning a language,
fixing a bug - silence is the enemy. You know your pairing is going wrong when
nobody is saying anything. Say _something_, even if you're just restating the
problem. Pairing is made to make you talk about what's going on - making your
brain work around the problem by putting it in your mouth. How incredible is
that?

This becomes really apparent when you've been coding on your own for
a while. You tend to find yourself going crazy over small bugs that are really
apparent when you're looking at them in someone else's code. This is why [rubber
ducking](http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?RubberDucking) happens - that experience you've
had of going to someone for help and suddenly realizing the solution halfway
through explaing the problem to them - they've become your rubber duck (remember
to thank them with a quack).

Same goes for teaching - the number of things I've got down solidly by having to
explain it to someone, out loud. It's mind blowing. You can't skip over anything
when you're talking, your brain can't trick you into false confidence by waving
its hands over a bit you don't understand. I gave a talk about bitwise operators
a few days ago - I thought I had it all covered, but when I got a question about
[two's complement](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two's_complement) it became
_really_ apparent that I didn't have a clue. Embarassing? Yes, a little - but
now at least I know where I'm ignorant, rather than being surprised about it
later.

Silence is the enemy of good and happy coding. Keep talking - even if it's just
to yourself.
