#+TITLE: Book Review: Computer Science Programming Basics in Ruby

#+DATE: [2014-12-14]

I recently finished reading
[[http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920028192.do][Computer Science
Programming Basics in Ruby]] by Ophir Frieder, Gideon Frieder and David
Grossman. I was looking for something that would extend my knowledge of
computer science fundamentals - the title appealed as I've done the
majority of my coding up to this point in Ruby, so I was hoping the
familiar language would allow me to concentrate more on the computer
science theory.

I was ultimately disappointed - the book isn't so much a computer
science primer as a programming primer. The concepts being taught in
this book tend to be basic ones - control flow, simple data structures,
how a computer works. It's pitched at an entry level, and for that I'm
sure it's ideal, but it's not quite what I was after.

Idiomatic Ruby is avoided in the book in favour of using patterns that
are more generic to all programming languages. This is a good idea as it
introduces core programming concepts in a non language specific way, but
the lack of common Ruby methods like =each= might be concerning to some.
The book teaches programming basics in Ruby, but I don't think it
teaches a great deal of Ruby while doing so.

That said I learned a great deal in Chapter 7, Sorting and Searching.
The comparison of different search and sort algorithms make a good
introduction to algorithms in general and made me think a bit harder
about the magic that goes on under the hood of Ruby methods and
operators that I take for granted. I'm going to try and learn more about
algorithms in the next few weeks (see my
[[/posts/2014/12/8/exposing-my-ignorance/][last post]] for the rest of
my hit list).

Maybe borrow this book from the library and give it a skim read if
you're already familiar with Ruby, because I'm sure you'll find some
useful stuff there. If you're interested in learning Ruby from the
ground up you should probably pair this book with something like
/[[http://www.manning.com/black2/][The Well Grounded Rubyist]]/ in order
to see why Ruby's so precious and shiny. Otherwise it's a well
structured, detailed and approachable introductory text, if maybe a
touch academic. Just not for me right now.
