#+TITLE: Surviving Windows

#+DATE: [2014-07-04 Fri]

I've worked within Windows and Microsoft OSs for... well, most of my
computing life now I think about it. I'm pretty sure that most people
are the same. And like most people I've always had my little moans about
it. Too many to mention.

This has come to a head since I [switched to Linux][LinuxSwitch] a few
months ago. Not that Linux (Ubuntu in my case) doesn't have it's own
long list of problems, but they all feel more like problems I should be
fixing myself - rather than things I'll just moan about and put up with.
Yes, Ubuntu (and the Unity desktop specfically) has 'spoiled' me. I'd
rather be working in that environment than any earlier version of
Windows. Woo-hoo. Hear the whoop from camp Linux, joy shall be in heaven
over one sinner that repenteth, etc etc usw.

But there's still so much of my life that has to be done in Windows.
Work spreadsheet has VBA macros? Work machine in Vista?
[[https://launchpad.net/pipelight][Netflix requires Silverlight]]? It's
inevitable.

So instead of moaning I've been trying to fix Windows to make it usable
like I want it to be. And I think I've found some good options. The
first thing to note is that I've been so used to putting up with Windows
that I was under the impression that there was very little that could be
done to it. Lay that thought to rest - there's hundreds of hacks,
options, fixes, and bits of software we can use to make Window's a
happier place to be. Or, if not actively happy, then at least
survivable...

** Winsplit Revolution
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: winsplit-revolution
   :END:

OK, not the greatest name. What I missed most about Ubuntu when stuck on
Vista was the way I could throw windows around the desktop using the
numpad. This feauture is neatly emulated with
[[http://download.cnet.com/WinSplit-Revolution/3000-2072_4-10971915.html][Winsplit
Revolution]], which is small and, well, works. You can customize the
shortcuts too. (Looks like the original website is no longer around so
I've linked to the CNET page).

** Put the taskbar on the side
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: put-the-taskbar-on-the-side
   :END:

Oh this sounds dumb I know, but nobody even thinks of doing it on
Windows because it's a change. Totally inspired by the Unity set up, it
just makes more sense. If most of what I'm doing involves reading down a
page on the screen - code, text, etc - then I really want optimize the
vertical space on the screen. So slam the taskbar to the side and get
yourself a couple of centimeters for free. If you were going to try one
new thing this week make it this.

** GVim
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: gvim
   :END:

All that Vim goodness - [[http://www.vim.org/download.php#pc][now on
your Windows]]. And you can use the same config files. And you can set
the config depending on the environment (Windows, Linux, OSX). And you
could save all those files onto Dropbox, make symlinks to them... OK -
too far. But get GVim for Windows.

** Autohotkey
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: autohotkey
   :END:

I'll write something about the what effect of removing the caps lock
button from my keyboard has been (no, not physically) at a later date.
But for fun keyboard hacks like this and more I've been enjoying
[[http://www.autohotkey.com/][Autohotkey]], which has its own simple
scripting language to allow you to remap and rewite your keyboard to
your hearts content.

** Get GNUy
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: get-gnuy
   :END:

I've tried [[https://www.cygwin.com/][Cygwin]] before - part of working
using a Linux only font tool. But I found it... big. Powerful, yes - but
big. So big I didn't use it. Second time around I've been using
[[https://github.com/bmatzelle/gow/wiki][Gow]] - which brings all the
*nix-y command line goodness to your =cmd= shell in Windows.

** Chocolatey
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: chocolatey
   :END:

Missing =apt-get= or similar package management utilities on Windows?
[[http://chocolatey.org/][Chocolatey]] to the rescue. Install Git!
Install Node! Install everything listed above and more, and get them all
updated from the command line. It's brilliant.

Ah, that's it for now. All I'd finish off by saying is that the only
thing holding me back from improving my experience of Windows was...
ignorance. And indolence. GNU/Linux makes you change things to fit the
way you work, and as soon as you've learned how to do that it's easier
to avoide complacence with other OSes. . A good lesson.
