#+TITLE: Silence is the Enemy

#+DATE: [2014-10-07]

I've been thinking about this post for a few weeks, but
[[file:@benjilanyado][Benji Lanyado]] from
[[https://www.picfair.com/][Picfair]] has just given a great talk about
starting his business. Great for a number of reasons (he's a very
charismatic speaker to begin with), but the key thing I'm taking home
with me is what he's just said about, well - talking.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  Talk to everyone. Get out of your flat.
#+END_QUOTE

It's easy to forget that in a few weeks I'm not going to be around here
at Makers. And that the best thing - the /best/ thing - about being here
is talking to people.

At every stage of coding - whether in solving a problem, learning a
language, fixing a bug - silence is the enemy. You know your pairing is
going wrong when nobody is saying anything. Say /something/, even if
you're just restating the problem. Pairing is made to make you talk
about what's going on - making your brain work around the problem by
putting it in your mouth. How incredible is that?

This becomes really apparent when you've been coding on your own for a
while. You tend to find yourself going crazy over small bugs that are
really apparent when you're looking at them in someone else's code. This
is why [[http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?RubberDucking][rubber ducking]]
happens - that experience you've had of going to someone for help and
suddenly realizing the solution halfway through explaing the problem to
them - they've become your rubber duck (remember to thank them with a
quack).

Same goes for teaching - the number of things I've got down solidly by
having to explain it to someone, out loud. It's mind blowing. You can't
skip over anything when you're talking, your brain can't trick you into
false confidence by waving its hands over a bit you don't understand. I
gave a talk about bitwise operators a few days ago - I thought I had it
all covered, but when I got a question about
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two's_complement][two's complement]] it
became /really/ apparent that I didn't have a clue. Embarassing? Yes, a
little - but now at least I know where I'm ignorant, rather than being
surprised about it later.

Silence is the enemy of good and happy coding. Keep talking - even if
it's just to yourself.
