#+TITLE: One week to go

#+DATE: [2014-07-28]

For those who know me, or have been following my
[[https://twitter.com/gypsydave5][Twitter feed]], you may know that I'll
be starting at [[http://www.makersacademy.com/][Makers Academy]] on the
4th of August. That's in a week's time. Part of the reason I've been
keeping this blog is to monitor my progress in preparing for that day.

So, why Makers?

My New Year's resolution was to change my life (aren't they always?). I
didn't want to spend the next thirty-plus years working in a career I
was adequately suited for (marketing) and being the guy in the
department who got to do all the maths-y/computery stuff while not being
at all enthusiastic about... well, about everything else he was doing.
At the time I was having a terrible time in my job

I sought advice from everyone I knew, and talked incessantly about
software development with anyone who would listen. I'm blessed with
good, patient friends who were happy to put up with this, a number of
who work in the industry already. They've steered me and mentored me
over the last few months (specifically
[@shapeshed][[https://twitter.com/shapeshed][george]] and
[@asbrookes][[https://twitter.com/asbrookes][andrew]]), shown me where
[[http://www.codecademy.com/][codecademy]] was, and generally answered
any of my questions. I recognised that this career change was going to
work - the more I learned the more I wanted to learn, and the more there
was to learn the more a learned (a happy virtuous circle). An interest
in tech and programming became a passion (my partner can attest to
this - barely an evening without being glued to the laptop, tapping
away). I became confident in my decision.

I mentioned my intentions to my friend Mike. "Oh," he said, "sort of
like what [[https://twitter.com/jamesjoshuahill][Josh]] did at that
Maker's place?" So I caught up with Josh who raved about his experience,
the atmosphere and the amount he learned. I showed the course to my
other dev friends. They hadn't heard of Makers, but were generally
impressed by the programme. One expressed concern about the Ruby/Rails
focus, in a world where [NodeJS][Node] was becoming the next big thing.
They suggested I ask the question.

So I wrote a short email to Makers, saying - 'hey, why Rails?' And I got
a well thought out, well written, extensive email in reply, arguing
that, yes, Node was important, but that Makers teachers how to be a
developer in a culture/method sense of that word, and that Rails was
just a good platform to start from - not the be all and end all.

Cost was of course an issue - nobody spends the best part of Â£10,000
pounds on a whim. And if I could achieve the same results just through
educating myself the Makers experience would be pointless. But I know a
few things about myself:

1. I /like/ difficult things
2. I work in intense bursts
3. I work best under pressure
4. I prefer to be in a gang working towards the same goal

I know that I'd work best with a goal, in an immersive environment,
surrounded by bloody clever people all working towards the same thing
and supporting each other. It's what saw me through University. I took
particular note of [[http://www.startuprob.com/learn-to-code/][this
article]] by one of the co-founders of Makers,
[[https://twitter.com/startuprob][Rob Johnson]]. I also knew that I
couldn't hang around, that if this was the right decision then it was
the right decision /now/, and it had to happen as quickly and
efficiently as possible.

I looked at other other bootcamps, mainly
[[https://generalassemb.ly/london][General Assembly]], who definitely
have scale and experience on their side. But I was sold on Makers after
spending some time with the other finalists of the
[[http://blog.skimlinks.com/2014/03/12/skimlinkstomakers-competition-introducing-the-finalists/][#SkimlinksToMakers]]
competition during the final interviews, and at the Makers open days.
Meeting the instructors (I especially remember talking with
[[https://twitter.com/rubenkostucki][Ruben]] - and a slightly confusing
attempt to talk with passion about /Person of Interest/, the Turing
test, chess and some other things. Enthusiastic, yes. Coherent...?). I
also read the (numerous) blogs of former students - I found
[[http://davewood.me/blog/2014/01/18/makers-academy-rewound/][Dave
Wood]]'s description pretty exciting and useful, and of course
[[http://jamesjoshuahill.tumblr.com/][Josh]]'s. I also had a
forty-minute phone conversation with
[[https://twitter.com/JordanPoulton][Jordan]] (he sent the great email),
who again answered all my questions in an open, non-salesy way. He'd
[[http://www.jordanpoulton.com/blog/makers-academy-12-hours-to-lift-off/][done
the course himself]], which gave a unique perspective, and spent at
least ten minutes trying to put me off.

He failed. I applied. The interview went well (Jordan again - felt like
he was stalking me...), although it was far from a push over (it's
amazing how difficult basic maths when someone's looking over your
shoulder - and a US keyboard layout threw me for at least a minute...).
But I left wanting to get in more than ever, and did a (pretty big)
whoop of joy when I received the email telling me that I had been
accepted.

So here I am, feeling pretty ready. Nervous, and excited. I've studied
some of the basics as hard as I could, know more about Ruby than I did
six months ago, and eager for more. I'm really looking forward to
learning something new everyday. First step is meeting the rest of my
cohort this Friday (exciting!). I'll be blogging as I go along (probably
nowhere near as extensively as this), just to keep a record on how I'm
doing.

But, so far, it looks like this is my best New Year's resolution. Ever.
