#+TITLE: Segmentation Fault

#+DATE: [2014-10-14]

This is dedicated to my mother. It's her birthday today. It's also
[[http://findingada.com/][Ada Lovelace day]].

[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ada_Lovelace][Augusta Ada King, Countess
Lovelace]] was the daughter of a poet, a friend and collaborator with
Babbage, a socialite and a wit. She also wrote the world's first
computer program. If there were a patron saint for the creative coder it
would be her.

Ada Lovelace day is a celebration of women in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics. It's also a day to reflect on the issues
that face women who work in those fields. The biggest one being "Why are
there so few women in tech?"

Makers Academy is commited to equality - the first day here when I told
my partner how many women were students here she was surprised; "That
many?". I'm rubbish at statitics, but looking around the room you could
guess at maybe 40-50% are women. It's a good sign.

We're holding a round table discussion on Women in Tech today (which is
another good sign).

One of the panel (I'm awful with names) has just said that he's
horrified, as a father, about the segmentation that's present in
culture. He's raising a son to be as gender neutral as possible - as
happy playing in a kitchen as with a laptop. But he's constantly
battling against a culture that genders everything - pink and blue
Kinder eggs with Barbie and Transormers respectively was his example.

My mum can do the numbers challenge on 'Countdown' faster than anyone I
know. She'd be disappointed if it wasn't done /before/ Carol Vordeman
pressed the button. She hates the anagrams. She's always hated the
anagrams. I hate the anagrams too. I love numbers because she loves
numbers. If I'm good at coding then she's had a hand in that.

She was told to be an English teacher when she was eighteen because she
told the careers adviser that she quite liked English. She went on the
be an amazing and dedicated teacher and retired this year. But what
might she have done if she'd said she liked maths? Or science? Or almost
anything else? Maybe she'd be a computer programmer now, retiring after
a long life in COBOL and C and helping me with my JavaScript. Or maybe
not - she was an amazing teacher. But who knows!

Or, worse, if her father hadn't made her feel good and proud about being
good at maths? Where would I be if my mum /hadn't/ liked puzzles and
maths?

The problem isn't 'inside' tech, it's /throughout/ society and culture.
It might make you dispair. It makes me dispair sometimes. But don't
dispair - look, here - I'll summarise the roundtable 'take away' actions
for everyone to do. Fix the world one stupid ignorant problem at a time.

###Women### - Go talk to children about what you do. - Call men out when
they say something offensive or just plain wrong. They're proabably
completely oblivious to the issue, so be polite.

###Men### - Listen. And be there and be nice. But mainly listen more. -
Don't think it's not problem; educate yourselves and recognise the
problem.

And one for everyone: 'Own Your Ignorance' (now that's wise) - don't
bluff it, don't fake it, don't ignore it, don't be scared of it. Your
scope for improvement /is/ your ignorance. (Maybe that should also
involve owning /other/ people's ignorance too, feeding in to the points
above...)

Oh, and one I hadn't heard before -- apparently the first version of
Siri knew how to get you to a stripclub but had no idea how to get you
emergency contraception.

Sexism, whether deliberate or accidental, is, like all evil (I'll stand
briefly with Plato on this) a consequence of ignorance of one form or
another. Would you trust a coder who wanted to be deliberately ignorant?

Ignorance sucks.

Happy Birthday Mum :)
