#+TITLE: For fun!

#+DATE: [2014-09-09]

So the last post was a bit of a downer, right? I thought I'd get it down
while things were still fresh in the mind.

But things aren't bad at all. Makers remains a lot of fun - if you're in
a bit of a funk the general environment of fun just pulls you through.
With running (yeah, back to running) you're not just interested in
making the distance - running in and of itself is fun. Believe me, the
best days of running I've had are ones where I find a comfortable pace
and just see where that quiet country lane will take me. Preferably in
beautiful sunshine.

Likewise coding. No, really.

A few days ago [[https://twitter.com/optilude][Martin Aspell]] from
[[http://www.deloittedigital.com/us/][Deloitte Digital]] came in and
gave us a lunchtime presentation. The lunchtime presentations at Makers
are one of the best perks of being here. You sit on beanbags while
people from the industry come and talk to you for twenty minutes about
what they do. This can be as diverse as data security, insurance
databases, restaurant bookings and - I'll write about this later - and a
fantastic talk from [[http://www.deloittedigital.com/us/][Rozemary
King]] from Pivotal labs about Product Management (amazing insight into
how an agile process is managed in the trenches).

But back to Martin. He gave a talk about his life, what he's done and
worked on and a little about Deloitte Digital as well. What stuck with
me most was something he said about his relationship with writing code:
he comapred it to an addiction. He finds it relaxing - he said it calms
him down in the evening, like doing a crossword or sudoku.

I thought it sounded a little mad, but he's right. The last few days
I've been taking breaks from the course by rewriting the Battleships
project, playing around with ideas and seeing what works. And for fun!
