#+TITLE: Lessons Learned

#+DATE: [2014-08-24]

Things I've learned so far from my teachers:

*** [[https://twitter.com/Stephen_lloyd][Stephen]] - Succinct Semantics
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: stephen---succinct-semantics
    :END:

I felt a little smug about my code when Steve sat next to me to see how
I was doing. I was seeing if there were any broken bikes in an array,
something like

#+BEGIN_SRC ruby
  bikes.select {|bike| bike.broken?}.count > 1
#+END_SRC

He took a quick look and pointed out that this was a little on the long
side. Does Ruby have an =any?= method for =Array=s? Sure enough, there
in =Enumerable=

#+BEGIN_SRC ruby
  bikes.any? {|bike| bike.broken?}
#+END_SRC

Better. I would have been happy. But Steve then says, try passing a the
symbol for =broken?= as a proc - something I'd seen and not used.

#+BEGIN_SRC ruby
  bikes.any?(&:broken?)
#+END_SRC

See how that's better? It says exactly what it does? Yes, I did. And I'd
learned that you don't have to sacrifice succinctness to semantics and
vice versa. Ruby has enough well-named methods and techniques to create
a short statement that someone who didn't know Ruby would still
understand. Lesson learned.

*** [[https://twitter.com/liviu_23][Mihai]] - Delete Your Code
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: mihai---delete-your-code
    :END:

I asked Mihai for some help changing my tests for the Boris Bikes
project. I was trying to change the RSpec tests I'd written from
[[http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/123627/what-are-the-london-and-chicago-schools-of-tdd][Chicago
to London style]] having just been shown how to do doubles.

Start again, Mihai said. Don't be precious or treasure what you've
written - just get rid of it and start again. You'll learn more that
way.

Since then I've taken immense pleasure in wiping entire projects out.
And learned more by doing that. Lesson learned.

*** [[https://twitter.com/ecomba][Enrique]] - Cooking without ever
having have Eaten
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: enrique---cooking-without-ever-having-have-eaten
    :END:

Late in the day I asked Enrique about program design. I was worried,
really worried, that I didn't know the right way to proceed with writing
a program. He'd just introduced the idea of design patterns that day, so
I asked him to recommend a book, or a checklist, or a mantra - the best
way to learn some patterns.

Even as I spoke, Enrique started moving him hands, miming typing in
front of me. Remember what I said earlier, he said, about coding being
entirely artificial. It's not like cooking where you know what food is
and what it tastes like. It's like cooking when you've never eaten food,
have no idea what good or bad food tastes like. The only way you'll
learn is by writing code, a lot of code. Then your instincts, your taste
and intuition, will improve.

It was only later that I connected this advice up with
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henri_Bergson#Creativity][Bergson's ideas
about creativity, specifically the swimming example]]. You wouldn't
think a person could swim if you only ever saw them walk, the argument
goes. For swimming to be intellectually comprehendable, you've got to
throw yourself in the water first. You can't theorize about things you
haven't done - intuition must take the lead, intelligence is a not a
speculative faculty, but a practical one.

Mind blown, I staggered home, ignored /The RSpec Book/ and wrote more
code. Lesson learned.
