#+TITLE: (Even More) Memoization in JavaScript

#+DATE: [2016-03-28]

A while ago I wrote a piece on [basic lazy evaluation and memoization in
JavaScript][firstBlog]. I'd like to continue some of the thoughts there
on memoization, and to look at how some popular JS libraries handle it.

*** Memoization refresher
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: memoization-refresher
    :END:

According to [Wikipedia][memWik], memoization is:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  an optimization technique used primarily to speed up computer programs
  by storing the results of expensive function calls and returning the
  cached result when the same inputs occur again.
#+END_QUOTE

We want the program to remember the results of its operation, so it
doesn't have to expend any extra time and effort in doing them all over
again. It all seems a little obvious really.

So the first time we saw memoization it was in the context of [lazy
evaluation][firstBlog], where the memoized function had already been
prepared to be lazy. The lazily evaluated function was executed within
our memoizer, and the result was retained within the scope of the
memoized function, to be returned each subsequent time the function was
called. As a refresher:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  function lazyEvalMemo (fn) {
    const args = arguments;
    let result;
    const lazyEval = fn.bind.apply(fn, args);
    return function () {
      if (result) {
        return result
      }
      result = lazyEval()
      return result;
    }
  }
#+END_EXAMPLE

Which is great if want the function to be memoized with a specific set
of arguments. But that isn't going to work all of the time - probably
not even most of the time. It's rare that there's just one set of
parameters we want to be eternally bound to our function. A bit of
freedom would be nice.

*** Keeping track of your arguments
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: keeping-track-of-your-arguments
    :END:

If we want to be able to memoize a function which can take a variety of
arguments, we need a way to keep track of them. Let's take one of the
simplest cases:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  function addOne (x) {
    return x + 1;
  };
#+END_EXAMPLE

That shouldn't take too much explanation. Now, in order to have a
memoized version of it, we need to keep track of all the different
values of =x= passed to it, and to associate them with the return value
of =addOne=.

A JavaScript object should suffice, taking =x= as a key, and the result
as the value. Let's give it a go:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE

  const memo = {};

  function memoAddOne (x) {
    if (memo[x]) {
      return memo[x];
    }
    return memo[x] = x + 1;
  };
#+END_EXAMPLE

This takes advantage of the fact that the value of an assignment to an
object is the value assigned (in this case =x + 1=), saving a line or
so. The only issue here is that the value of =memo= is floating around
in public, just waiting for other functions to overwrite and mutate. We
need a way to hide it.

Well, we could place =memo= on the function itself - it is an object
after all - and just put an underscore in front of its name to try and
let the world know that it's private (even though it isn't really
private):

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  function memoAddOne (x) {
    memoAddOne._memo = memoAddOne._memo || {};

    if (memoAddOne._memo[x]) {
      return memoAddOne._memo[x];
    }
    return memoAddOne._memo[x] = x + 1;
  };
#+END_EXAMPLE

This isn't beautiful, but it works. =_memo= gets defined as an empty
object on initialization and gets filled up with results on each
application of the function - throw some =console.log()=s in there to
prove it to yourself. That's exciting - although we're still a little
exposed with the =_memo= property being available on the function.

That said, we've got what we came for - a memoized version of our
function that works for many different arguments.

*** Fun with strings
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: fun-with-strings
    :END:

Problem is, we're reliant on =x= being used as the property for our
=_memo= object. As all good school children are taught, JavaScript, like
the universe, is just a load of strings held together by
poorly-understood forces. When =x= is used in =_memo[x]=, JavaScript
handily casts it to a string to be used as the property name.

I say handily - but try this...

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  memoAddOne([55]) // => '551'
  memoAddOne(55) // => '551'
  memoAddOne(66) // => 67
  memoAddOne([66]) // => 67
#+END_EXAMPLE

Because...

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  55.toString() // => '55'
  [55].toString() // => '55'
#+END_EXAMPLE

Ah, JavaScript: thou givest with one hand... =toString()=, which is what
JavaScript is using under the hood to cast the non-string property
identifier to a string, does not uniquely identify that argument. So our
function behaves inconsistently depending on whether it was given the
array or the number that =toString()= converts to the same string.

We need a more predictable way of parsing our argument. Happily, we can
borrow one of the built-in functions of JavaScript to do this,
=JSON.stringify()=.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  JSON.stringify(55) // => '55'
  JSON.stringify('55') // => '"55"'
  JSON.stringify([55]) // => '[55]'
  JSON.stringify(['55']) // => '["55"]'
#+END_EXAMPLE

Pretty good - let's give it a whirl:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  function memoAddOne (x) {
    memoAddOne._memo = memoAddOne._memo || {};
    const jsonX = JSON.stringify(x);

    if (memoAddOne._memo[jsonX]) {
      return memoAddOne._memo[jsonX];
    }
    return memoAddOne._memo[jsonX] = x + 1;
  };

  memoAddOne([55]) // => '551'
  memoAddOne(55) // => 56
#+END_EXAMPLE

Sorted.

*** The General Case
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-general-case
    :END:

Now let's put together a function that can memoize /any/ function - and
as a bonus, we can also hide that nasty =_memo= property behind a
closure:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  function memoize (fn) {
    const memo = {};

    return function () {
      const args = Array.prototype.slice.call(arguments);
      const jsonArgs = JSON.stringify(args);

      if (memo[jsonArgs]) {
        return memo[jsonArgs];
      }
      return memo[jsonArgs] = fn.apply(null, args);
    };
  };
#+END_EXAMPLE

Much of this should now be familiar, but let's dig in. We take a single
argument, hopefully a function, and bind it to the variable =fn=. We now
get to declare =memo= inside our function - and hooray it's now
unavailable to anyone but the function we're returning. Now that's what
I call private - thank you closures!

The function we give back, well we don't know how many arguments it's
going to be given so why bind them to any parameters? We'll just leave
its parameters empty. Any arguments we do get we'll instantly turn into
an array by using the funky =Array.prototype.slice.call(arguments)=
dance. And that array we can =stringify()= on the next line and call
something useful like =jsonArgs=.

Then we do much the same as above, only instead of giving =x + 1= as the
value of =_memo[jsonX]=, we set the value of =memo[jsonArgs]= as the
result of applying the =args= array to the original function we were
given to memoize. Job done.

Again, throw some =console.log=s in there to see what's really going on.

*** Here's One I Made Earlier Installed With =npm=
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: heres-one-i-made-earlier-installed-with-npm
    :END:

The above is so incredibly useful that you'll not be surprised to learn
that it's implemented, with slight modifications, in functional
JavaScript libraries like [Underscore], [Lodash] and (personal niche
favourite) [Ramda].[fn:1]

Let's take a look at [the Lodash implementation]:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  function memoize(func, resolver) {
    if (typeof func != 'function' || (resolver && typeof resolver != 'function')) {
      throw new TypeError(FUNC_ERROR_TEXT);
    }
    var memoized = function() {
      var args = arguments,
          key = resolver ? resolver.apply(this, args) : args[0],
          cache = memoized.cache;

      if (cache.has(key)) {
        return cache.get(key);
      }
      var result = func.apply(this, args);
      memoized.cache = cache.set(key, result);
      return result;
    };
    memoized.cache = new memoize.Cache;
    return memoized;
  }
#+END_EXAMPLE

Now, although this is a little more long-winded complicated than the
code above, it should be similar enough for us to see that they're doing
the same thing. The difference being that in the above we are to supply
an external function to hash the arguments (the =resolver= function),
and that Lodash offers a custom caching object with a =get()= and
=set()= interface, which we can overwrite if we like.

(Bonus Question: why does this implementation of =memoize= suck if we
don't supply a =resolver= argument?)

The above library code will save us all the hassle of writing a
memoization function ourselves - but now we can see how they work under
the hood, we can take a more informed decision about whether we need to
create a dependency on external library, or whether we just put together
the (relatively) simple piece of code ourselves.

[fn:1] Seriously, this is the one to go for. It's amazing, it's
       beautiful - it's /functional/. [the Lodash implementation]:
       https://github.com/lodash/lodash/blob/4.6.1-npm/memoize.js#L48
       [firstBlog]:
       /posts/2015/3/21/%28basic%29-lazy-evaluation-and-memoization-in-javascript/
       [Ramda]: http://ramdajs.com/0.20.0/index.html [Underscore]:
       http://underscorejs.org/ [Lodash]: https://lodash.com/ [memWik]:
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memoization
