#+TITLE: Learning the C Programming Language

#+BEGIN_HTML
  <h2>
#+END_HTML

Part 1: hello, world

#+BEGIN_HTML
  </h2>
#+END_HTML

#+DATE: [2016-08-09]

I've started to learn C. There's a number of reasons for this. First, it
was the 'proper' programming language when I was a kid. Second, I've
been learning quite a bit of Go recently, and just about every other
page on the excellent [[https://blog.golang.org/][Go Blog]] has a
sentence that starts with "In C...".[fn:1]

Third, I've started a course on
[[https://www.coursera.org/specializations/data-structures-algorithms][Data
Structures and Algorithms]] on [[https://www.coursera.org/][Coursera]],
inspired by the ever-inspirational
[[https://twitter.com/deniseyu21][Denise Yu]]. The course only accepts
submissions in four languages: Python, Java, C++ and C.[fn:2] Going
through that list my mind went "Basically Ruby with /bleaugh/
indentation, /bleaugh/ Java /bleaugh/, sounds /really/ hard, sounds
hard." So I went with 'sounds hard'.

I thought I'd try and capture my process of learning C as it might be
useful to others in a similar position - i.e.Â no computer science
background but know how to program in Ruby and JavaScript. I'll be
approaching this in a series of posts, most of which will be following
the loose structure of
[[http://blog.gypsydave5.com/the-c-programming-language-presentation/][a
presentation I gave on C]].[fn:3]

** Background
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: background
   :END:

C was invented by Dennis Richie at Bell labs in the 1970s in order to
write UNIX.[fn:4] He needed a language that provided sufficient
abstraction to program quickly and efficiently, while at the same time
being able to communicate directly with the computer's memory addresses
to allow a programmer to perform low level optimizations. It has been a
remarkably popular language, being used to write other languages (Ruby
is written in C, NodeJS wouldn't work without
[[https://nikhilm.github.io/uvbook/introduction.html][libuv]], written
in C), and heavily influencing most modern programming languages (Java,
Ruby, JavaScript, and most obviously, Go).

** =hello, world=
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: hello-world
   :END:

Another of the ways C has influenced programming is through
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_C_Programming_Language][/The C
Programming Language/]] by Richie and Brian Kernighan. The author's
intials gave their name to a
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indent_Style#K.26R_style][style of
formatting code]], along with giving us the /de facto/ standard for your
first program: "hello, world".

#+BEGIN_SRC C
  #include <stdio.h>

  int main() {
      printf("hello, world\n");
  }
#+END_SRC

Line 1: Include a file called =stdio.h=. It includes information about
the functions in the C standard library that deal with I/O -
input/output. In this case printing to the terminal.

Line 3: All C programs start with a function called =main= - this is the
function that gets executed when the program is, well, executed. The
arguments (of which we're using none at all) are in the parentheses. The
body of the function is in the curly braces. So far so JavaScript. For
people who have never seen a typed language the =int= is a little
surprising. All it's telling us (and C) is that the return value for
this function is an integer. We'll talk about types later, but for now
the =int= is almost working like =def= in Ruby or =function= in
JavaScript - it's a keyword declaring a function.

Line 4: The meat of the program. Here we're calling a function called
=printf= which has already been written for us as a part of the C
standard library - this is why we did that =#include= at the beginning.
We're calling it with a single argument, a string literal inside double
quotes, that just says "hello, world" with a newline character (=\n=) at
the end.

At the end of the line we put a semi-colon to tell C that the line has
finished.

** Compiling and running
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: compiling-and-running
   :END:

If you put all of that into a file called =hello-world.c=, save it, head
to the terminal and type[fn:5]

#+BEGIN_SRC sh
  gcc hello-world.c
#+END_SRC

Then if you =ls= the same directory you should see a new file
called=a.out=.[fn:6] If you then run this with =./a.out=, you'll see
=hello, world=. Mission accomplished.

=gcc= is the [[https://gcc.gnu.org/][Gnu Compiler Collection]],[fn:7]
which will compile your C program into an executable that your computer
can run. All this means is that instead of translating each line of your
program into something your computer can understand as you run it, as
with something like Ruby or JavaScript, we're translating the whole
program in one go before we run it.

=a.out= isn't that informative, so in order to get a better filename we
can pass a flag to GCC:

#+BEGIN_SRC sh
  gcc hello-world.c -o hello-word
#+END_SRC

Which outputs to the file =hello-world=, which we can now run with
=./hello-world=

Success, we're now all C programmers!

*** Why =main= returns an =int=
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: why-main-returns-an-int
    :END:

If you've run programs on the command line before you may be aware that
you get exit codes with each program that runs. You may have even been
(un)lucky enough to see something on the lines of
=Error: non-zero exit code=. On a POSIX system, a process returns a
number to the process that called it to let it know how things went -
this is called the exit code. =0= is the good one, every other number is
some flavour of 'gone wrong'.

The default return value for main, if we don't explicitly return a
value, is =0=. We can change this behaviour in our =hello-world= by
returning an explicit value using the keyword =return= (very Ruby, so
JavaScript).

#+BEGIN_SRC C
  #include <stdio.h>

  int main() {
      printf("hello, world\n");
      return 1;
  }
#+END_SRC

(don't forget the semicolon!)

Experiment with different return values. Remember to recompile your
program each time you do. You may be able to see the returned value in
your terminal's prompt. Otherwise you can echo out the last commands
exit status with the command =echo $?=.

[fn:1] Don't believe me? Look at
       [[https://blog.golang.org/go-slices-usage-and-internals][this]]

[fn:2] You can now do the same course with a more diverse set of
       languages.

[fn:3] This was given at a Makers Academy alumni event. To view the
       speakers notes tap =n=.

[fn:4] A longer discussion of the origins of C was written by Richie and
       is available
       [[https://www.bell-labs.com/usr/dmr/www/chist.pdf][here]]

[fn:5] This assumes you have gcc installed, which is likely if you've
       been developing on your computer for a while.

[fn:6] You want to know /why/ it's =a.out=? Read Richie's C History -
       link above.

[fn:7] Yes, it used to be called the Gnu C Compiler - acronyms are so
       wonderfully flexible...
