---
layout: post
title: "How to code (almost) everywhere"
date: 2015-06-17 17:12:40
tags:
    - Practice
published: true
---

'Always be coding' was a piece of advice I was given early on when I was
learning to be a developer, but it struck me today how incredibly easy it can
be. The trick is to treat your computer like a newspaper or a novel. And
the way to achieve this is to reduce the barriers (both mental and physical)
that prevent you from writing.

With the requirements for a development environment being just a
laptop - internet connection optional - you can start to hack on a problem
anwhere you have access to a lap (preferably your own). That's anywhere you can
sit down.

The only other physical limiting factor is how fast you can take out and put
away your laptop. Reducing the friction involved in starting (and stopping)
coding not only increases the time you have to dedicate to it, it opens up new
places you can code, and allows you to form interesting new habits. Essentially
you will become able to code in quick, short bursts when that becomes possible.

I use a [simple soft case by Plemo][Plemo] which has a pair of integrated carry
handles.  I usually stash the case and Mac in my backpack, but the handles help
me carry it on its own for quick access if I know I'm going to be stopping and
starting a lot - say when changing trains on a commute. The Mac wakes up from
sleep in about 2-3 seconds.

This all means that I can dip in and out of coding with the ease of reading
a newspaper when travelling, when waiting for someone, when grabbing
lunch - it's easy to pick up and put away in a matter of seconds. This means you
can now code in shorter bursts - think of them as 'microsessions'.

A side benefit of this is that you will spend (even) more time thinking about
code when away from the keyboard. The gaps between each will be
filled with thoughts about what you just did and what you will do next. It
encourages an increased refection on your practice as a result of the natural
pauses and interruptions that occur in life, and not the artificial ones that
are generated by techniques like [Pommodoro].

Try taking your laptop everywhere for a week and see what the shortest viable
time to do something useful on it is. I've managed to get something worthwhile
done between two stops on the tube.

(And if you can't sit down you can always [do some Clojure on your
phone][PhoneClojure]).

[Plemo]: http://www.amazon.co.uk/13-13-3-Notebook-Computer-MacBook-Briefcase/dp/B00GQT54GO
[PhoneClojure]: /posts/2015/5/18/clojure-on-the-tube/
[Pommodoro]: http://pomodorotechnique.com/
