---
layout: post
title:  "Vimming"
date:   2014-05-14 20:52:15
categories: software Vim editors
---

I'm not sure why I've started to use Vim obsessively over the last week - there
are a number of factors feeding in, mostly centred around my perverse need to
do make something more difficult than is strictly necessary; I'm learning Vim
"Because it's there"...

That's not strictly true - if I'm going to blame something it's going to be
Windows Vista. Or, more speifically, the way Windows Vista insists on
sporadically freezing my mouse for 10-20 seconds every fifteen minutes or so.
It starts to add up, killing the flow of the work and slowing me down no end.
So I discovered [Vimium][Vimium], an extension for Chromium that puts all the
Vim keys into the browser. If you've used the shortcut keys in Twitter you'll
be right at home (the same with Gmail's shortcuts but slightly less so). It's
not only let me circumvent my mouse when it freezes; I've found myself using it
in preference to the mouse in most cases, fingers sitting happily on the home
keys as I navigate around the web, mostly without any hold ups. Even if you
don't think you'll use it it's worth installing just to see the way it implements
link clicking.

So having got this far it felt churlish not to go and install Vim, by way of
the Windows build of [Gvim][Gvim]. Now, while I'm trying to wean myself off
Windows (made much easier by having a Vista box at work), I am still forced to
use it (oh that Vista box at work). I'd been happy up to now with [Sublime Text
3][ST3], which I have synced across all my computers and which also implements
a ['Vintage'][ST3Vim] (should that be 'Vimtage') mode with a most of the Vim
commands intact. But it's always worth trying new things I figured, and getting
Vim going nicely on Windows seemed like a fun challenge.

Challenge it was. I love the Sublime Text [Package Manager][STPM], which
beautifully lists and installs packages from Sublime Text itself. Very cool.
Looking for something similar in Vim I found [Vundle][Vundle], which installs
Vim packages directly from Github, locally, or almost anywhere, when they're
listed in the `.vimrc` configuration file. Like everything in the open-source
community it's all geared up for \*nix systems, so takes [a little bit of
tweaking][VundleWin] to get going on Windows.

