---
layout: post
title:  "Starting Out"
date:   2014-05-14 20:52:15
categories: software education codeschools
---

Friend of mine has just asked me for some advice abot what's the best way to
learn about the things that I'm learning about. Struck me as a a crazy question
as I'm only really starting out myself. Who am I to say what's the best?

Yet I considered my experiences at university, where teaching was as much
a part of learning as sitting down with a book. Teaching, advising, and
generally talking about a subject (hey, like this blog!) helps cement learning
in the author. And may be of some value to following the same path later on.
And the other advantage is that my experiences are going to be fresher - I've
actually been learning using the resources I would recommend, rather than just
recommending them in an abstract fashion when the tools are of no use to me.

(Of course you could argue that I would also have no idea if I was being taught
the *wrong* things, or getting into bad habits. But there are upsides and
downsides --[everything is dangerous][Foucault], so take it all with a pinch of salt.)

So where to start...

##HTML & CSS

Most people who want to learn something about coding are going to need to
learn HTML and CSS. I'm fairly sure that this is the usual entry point of people
starting out as the www has made the use of these two markup languages
ubiquitous to the point where it impacts on lives more and more. It's
unfortunate that HTML is awful to write, but on the plus side they're both
(relatively) simple. And, like I said, ubiquitous -- it will always be useful to
know how a webpage is structured.

##[Codecademy][CA]

Codecademy is where I started after flailing around for a bit, and it's where
things really took off for me. It built some powerful foundations, shored up
some weak areas - and it was a lot of fun too. I'd recommend trying out their
build a [homepage project][homepage] to begin with, then following along their [HTML track][HTMLtrack] to
completion.

[CA]:
[Foucault]: https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Michel_Foucault#Sourced
[HTMLtrack]:
[homepage]:
